<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
			<p>At sixteen minutes to six, Mulholland rushed down the stairs into the Bogey Hole, shouting in a hushed whisper all the way:</p>
			<p>“Commandant, Commandant, we have him, we have him!”</p>
			<p>Gallagher rushed to the stairway. He found Mulholland grasping the wall with one hand, with his cap in the other hand, panting, with perspiration rolling down his cheeks in drops.</p>
			<p>“It was Katie Fox,” he gasped. “She came runnin’ down Mount William Road: Charlie Carrol headed her off. She tole him Gypo was up in her room, in bed. No. 61 Mount William Crescent. Captain Burton has got the house surrounded. He sent me up for orders.”</p>
			<p>“Katie Fox?” said Gallagher. “I thought she was⁠—”</p>
			<p>“She’s mad with dope.”</p>
			<p>“I see. Double back and tell Burton I’ll be down immediately. Don’t move till I arrive.”</p>
			<p>“All right, Commandant.”</p>
			<p>Mulholland raced up the stairs again. Gallagher rushed back to the witnesses’ room. Mary McPhillip had fallen into a doze. He roused her.</p>
			<p>“Come on, Mary,” he whispered. “We are going now. We found him.”</p>
			<p>“Who? What? Jesus, Mary and Joseph! Who did you find?”</p>
			<p>“The informer. Gypo Nolan. We found him at 61 Mount William Crescent. I am going there now. Come along. Then I’ll leave you home.”</p>
			<p>She was waking up gradually, frightened and rubbing her eyes. Gallagher fidgeted excitedly, trying to get her to her feet.</p>
			<p>“What time is it?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“A quarter to six.”</p>
			<p>“Heavens above! Mother will be gone to Mass before I get home.”</p>
			<p>“What does it matter?”</p>
			<p>“Of course it matters. I was to have gone with her this morning. For Frankie.”</p>
			<p>“Where does she go to Mass?”</p>
			<p>“Mount William Crescent.”</p>
			<p>“Well, we’re going there, too. You can go into the chapel and meet her there.”</p>
			<p>“Why? What’s at Mount William Crescent?”</p>
			<p>She was fully awake now and had got to her feet, wild eyed.</p>
			<p>Gallagher got angry and swore. He stamped his feet.</p>
			<p>“Come on quickly. I have no time. I tell you the informer has been found. He is at Mount William Crescent. I’m going down there. Come along.”</p>
			<p>“You’re going to murder him,” she gasped, with her bosom heaving.</p>
			<p>“Murder be damned!” cried Gallagher. “We’re going to wipe him out.”</p>
			<p>“You’re a beast. You’re not going to murder him, not while I can prevent it.”</p>
			<p>She rushed from the room. With a fierce oath he rushed after her. He caught her at the foot of the stairs. The sentries rushed up. She kept screaming and striking out with her clawing hands.</p>
			<p>“Keep her here,” he hissed. “Don’t let her out on any account for an hour. Then let her off and get home. Good-bye.” He looked fiercely into Mary’s eyes. His face was ashen with rage. “We spare neither man nor woman. Remember that.”</p>
			<p>Then he rushed up the stairs.</p>
			<p>“Murderer, murderer,” she cried after him, until they stuffed her mouth.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
